.TH colmap 1 "June 2026" "COLMAP 4.1" "COLMAP Manual"
.SH NAME
colmap \- Structure-from-Motion and Multi-View Stereo pipeline
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B colmap
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B colmap
.RI [ help | \-h | \-\-help ]
.br
.B colmap
.RI [ version | \-v ]
.br
.B colmap system_info
.RI [ \-\-format " {text,json}]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B COLMAP
is a general-purpose Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and Multi-View Stereo (MVS)
pipeline with a graphical and command-line interface. It reconstructs sparse
and dense 3D models from ordered or unordered image collections.
.PP
Each command exposes its own options; run
.B colmap
.I command
.B \-h
for the full list. Options may also be supplied via an INI project file with
.BR \-\-project_path .
.SH COMMANDS BY PIPELINE STAGE
.SS Automatic
.TP
.B automatic_reconstructor
End-to-end reconstruction (extraction, matching, mapping, and \(em when a CUDA
GPU is present \(em dense MVS).
.SS Feature extraction & matching
.TP
.B feature_extractor
Detect and describe features (SIFT on CPU/GPU, or ALIKED via ONNX).
.TP
.B exhaustive_matcher
Match every image pair. Best for small/medium unordered sets.
.TP
.B sequential_matcher
Match temporally adjacent frames; ideal for video.
.TP
.B vocab_tree_matcher
Retrieve candidate pairs via a vocabulary tree. Use for
.I large
collections (thousands of images); see TUNING below.
.TP
.B spatial_matcher \fR, \fB transitive_matcher \fR, \fB feature_importer \fR, \fB matches_importer
Additional pairing/import strategies.
.SS Sparse reconstruction (SfM)
.TP
.B mapper
Incremental SfM. The most robust, accurate default.
.TP
.B global_mapper
Global SfM (the integrated GLOMAP pipeline). Faster on large, well-connected
collections; see MAPPER SELECTION.
.TP
.B hierarchical_mapper
Cluster \(-> map \(-> merge for very large scenes.
.TP
.B bundle_adjuster \fR, \fB point_triangulator \fR, \fB point_filtering \fR, \fB rotation_averager
Refinement and sub-steps.
.SS Dense reconstruction (MVS, requires CUDA)
.TP
.B patch_match_stereo \fR, \fB stereo_fusion \fR, \fB poisson_mesher \fR, \fB delaunay_mesher \fR, \fB advancing_front_mesher
Dense depth estimation, fusion, and meshing.
.B Note:
these require a CUDA GPU and are unavailable on macOS in this build.
.SS Model, database & image tools
.TP
.B model_analyzer
Report reconstruction statistics (registered images, points, track length,
reprojection error).
.TP
.B model_converter \fR, \fB model_aligner \fR, \fB model_merger \fR, \fB model_cropper \fR, ...
Model manipulation.
.TP
.B database_creator \fR, \fB database_cleaner \fR, \fB database_merger
Database utilities.
.TP
.B image_undistorter \fR, \fB image_rectifier \fR, \fB image_registrator \fR, ...
Image utilities.
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.B system_info
Print detected CPU/RAM/core topology, OpenMP threads, recommended extraction
thread count, and build configuration.
.B \-\-format json
emits a single JSON object for tooling and bug reports.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
These apply to every command (via
.BR BaseOptionManager ).
.TP
.BI \-\-progress_format " {none,plain,jsonl}"
Emit machine-readable progress events on
.B stdout
(default
.BR none ,
i.e. unchanged behavior). glog output stays on stderr.
.B jsonl
is recommended for pipeline orchestrators.
.TP
.BI \-\-progress_every " N"
Progress emit cadence in items (0 = per-stage default).
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress non-essential INFO logging.
.TP
.BI \-\-log_level " N"
glog verbosity (higher = more verbose).
.TP
.BI \-\-project_path " PATH"
Load all options from an INI project file.
.SH RESOURCE-AWARE OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-FeatureExtraction.num_threads " N"
CPU extraction threads. Default
.B \-1
(automatic). On Apple Silicon the automatic value uses the
.I performance
cores (not every logical core), which is both faster and lighter; symmetric
CPUs are unaffected.
.TP
.BI \-\-FeatureExtraction.max_memory_gb " G"
Soft RAM budget (GiB) for CPU SIFT extraction. When > 0 the thread count is
reduced so the estimated working set fits the budget \(em useful on
memory-constrained machines (e.g. 16 GB laptops). 0 (default) disables the cap.
.TP
.BI \-\-FeatureExtraction.max_image_size " N"
Down-scale images whose longer side exceeds
.IR N .
.TP
.BI \-\-SiftExtraction.first_octave " N"
First scale-space octave.
.B \-1
(default) up-samples the image 2x before detection \(em helpful for small/
low-resolution images but
.I 4x
the memory and time. For images larger than ~2 MP, setting
.B 0
typically yields equivalent reconstruction quality at a large memory and speed
saving (measured: 3.8x faster extraction, 3.8x less RAM, equivalent registered
images / reprojection error).
.SH MAPPER SELECTION
.TP
.B mapper \fR (incremental)
Default. Most robust and accurate; best for small/medium sets, sequential
video, or weakly connected match graphs.
.TP
.B global_mapper \fR (GLOMAP)
Faster on large, well-connected, unordered/internet collections. Needs a
well-conditioned view graph.
.TP
.B hierarchical_mapper
Very large scenes that exceed a single-pass budget.
.SH TUNING
.PP
.B Vocabulary-tree matching
prunes image pairs only when
.B \-\-VocabTreeMatching.num_images
is much smaller than the total image count. On small/medium sets the default
(100) retrieves nearly every image, so it is no faster than
.B exhaustive_matcher
while adding index overhead. Prefer
.B exhaustive_matcher
for hundreds of images; reserve
.B vocab_tree_matcher
(with a modest
.BR num_images )
for thousands.
.PP
On a 16 GB Apple Silicon machine, a good low-footprint recipe is:
.RS
.nf
colmap feature_extractor --image_path IMAGES --database_path DB \\
    --SiftExtraction.first_octave 0 --FeatureExtraction.max_memory_gb 6
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Generic failure.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line arguments.
.TP
.B 3
Failed to load required input (database/images/model).
.TP
.B 4
GPU/Metal/CUDA initialization failure.
.TP
.B 5
Failed to write output.
.TP
.B 130 \fR/\fB 143
Interrupted by SIGINT/SIGTERM after a clean partial save.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
End-to-end on a 16 GB Mac, low memory footprint:
.RS
.nf
colmap feature_extractor --image_path IMAGES --database_path DB \\
    --SiftExtraction.first_octave 0 --FeatureExtraction.max_memory_gb 6
colmap exhaustive_matcher --database_path DB
colmap mapper --image_path IMAGES --database_path DB --output_path SPARSE
colmap model_analyzer --path SPARSE/0
.fi
.RE
.PP
Driven by an orchestrator (machine-readable progress):
.RS
.nf
colmap mapper --image_path IMAGES --database_path DB \\
    --output_path SPARSE --progress_format jsonl
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cache/colmap/
Cached downloads (vocabulary trees, ONNX models).
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation at
.UR https://colmap.github.io/
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
COLMAP is developed by Johannes L. Schoenberger and contributors.
